Add information about nest_vars.sh and update Linux installation instructions (#1515)
nest/nest-simulator: doc/installation/linux_install.rst

Ubuntu/Debian Installation
==========================

.. _standard:

Dependencies
------------

> To build NEST, you need a recent version of `CMake <https://cmake.org/install>`_ and `libtool <https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/libtool.html>`_; the latter should be available for most systems and is probably already installed.

Reviewer: We should have a central file where dependencies are collected, as we have for the docs (conda environment). This section could then have an additional sentence "For the full list of requirements check [here]()". We should do this in a separate PR though.

Reviewer: Thanks for adding #1612 for this, @sarakonradi.

.. _standard:

Dependencies
------------

To build NEST, you need a recent version of `CMake <https://cmake.org>`_ and `libtool <https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/libtool.html>`_; the latter should be available for most systems and is probably already installed.

> .. note:: NEST requires CMake 3.12 or higher, but we recommend version 3.16.X. You can type ``cmake --version`` on the commandline to check your current version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. note:: NEST requires CMake 3.12 or higher, but we recommend version 3.16.X. You can type ``cmake --version`` on the commandline to check your current version.

```

NEST should now be successfully installed on your system. You should now be able to ``import nest``  from a python or ipython shell.

Setting the module loading path
-------------------------------

If your operating system does not find the ``nest`` executable or if Python does not find the ``nest`` module, your path variables may not be set correctly. This may also be the case if Python cannot load the ``nest`` module due to missing or incompatible libraries.

In order to correctly set the module loading path or build an extension module for NEST:

1. Source ``nest_vars.sh``:

  .. code-block:: sh

      source </path/to/nest_install_dir>/bin/nest_vars.sh

> 2. Set the ``NEST_MODULE_PATH``.
> 

Reviewer: I would include a line how to actually do it:
```suggestion
2. Set the ``NEST_MODULE_PATH``.

  .. code-block:: sh
      export NEST_MODULE_PATH=</path/to/your/modules/>
      
```

Author: @terhorstd This file got updated after the merge of sarakonradi/nest-simulator#2. Please check again!

    make install
    make installcheck

NEST should now be successfully installed on your system.

> * Before using NEST, make sure that all the environment variables are set correctly. See the section `Environment variables`_ for details.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Before using NEST, make sure that all required environment variables are set correctly. See the section `Environment variables`_ for details.
```

Alternatively, the following could be a nice shortcut for people who already know their way around:

```suggestion
* Before using NEST, make sure that all required environment variables are set correctly. In short, this can be established by sourcing the shell script `nest_vars.sh`, which is installed into the path for binaries selected during the CMake run. See the section `Environment variables`_ for details.
```

A shell script is provided in ``</install/path/>bin/nest_vars.sh`` to make setting the environment variables more convenient. Setting the environment variables in your active shell session requires sourcing the script:

.. code-block:: sh

   source </install/path/>bin/nest_vars.sh

You may want to include this line in your ``.bashrc`` file, so that the environment variables are set automatically.

The following variables are set in ``nest_vars.sh``:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 10 30

   * - Path
     - Description
   * - ``NEST_INSTALL_DIR``
     - NEST installation directory. Contains ``bin``, ``lib``, etc.
   * - ``NEST_DATA_DIR``	
     - NEST finds standard *.sli files ``$NEST_DATA_DIR/sli``
   * - ``NEST_DOC_DIR``
     - NEST built-in online help finds help files ``$NEST_DOC_DIR/help``
   * - ``NEST_PYTHON_PREFIX``
     - The path where the PyNEST bindings are installed.
   * - ``PYTHONPATH``

>      - Search path for non-standard Python module locations. Will be prepended to or created to if it does not exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - Search path for non-standard Python module locations. Will be prepended to or created if it does not exist.
```

   * - ``PATH``

>      - Search path for binaries. Will be prepended to or created to if it does not exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - Search path for binaries. Will be prepended to or created if it does not exist.
```

   * - ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``

>      - Search path for shared objects (*.so files). Note: called ``DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH`` on MacOS.  Will be prepended to or created to if it does not exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - Search path for shared objects (*.so files). Note: called ``DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH`` on MacOS.  Will be prepended to or created if it does not exist.
```

The script ``/install/path/bin/nest_vars.sh`` can be sourced in ``.bashrc`` and will set these paths for you. This also allows to switch between NEST installations in a convenient manner.

Environment variables
---------------------

> There are several environment variables that describe where components of the NEST installation can be found. In particular when installing to a custom directory, it is typically necessary to explicitly set these variables, so that your operating system can find the NEST binaries and libraries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A number of environment variables are used to specify where the components of a NEST installation are found. In particular when installing to a custom directory, it is typically necessary to explicitly set these variables, so that your operating system can find the NEST binaries, its libraries and custom extension modules.
```

> A shell script is provided in ``</install/path/>bin/nest_vars.sh`` to make setting the environment variables more convenient. Setting the environment variables in your active shell session requires sourcing the script:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For your convenience, a shell script setting all required environment variables is provided in ``</install/path/>bin/nest_vars.sh``. Setting the environment variables in your active shell session requires sourcing the script:
```

.. code-block:: sh

   source </install/path/>bin/nest_vars.sh

> You may want to include this line in your ``.bashrc`` file, so that the environment variables are set automatically.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You may want to include this line in your ``.bashrc`` file, so that the environment variables are set automatically whenever you open a new terminal.
```

The following variables are set in ``nest_vars.sh``:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 10 30

>    * - Path

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   * - Variable
```

     - Description
   * - ``NEST_INSTALL_DIR``
     - NEST installation directory. Contains ``bin``, ``lib``, etc.
   * - ``NEST_DATA_DIR``	

>      - NEST finds standard *.sli files ``$NEST_DATA_DIR/sli``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - NEST finds standard *.sli files in ``$NEST_DATA_DIR/sli``
```

   * - ``NEST_DOC_DIR``

>      - NEST built-in online help finds help files ``$NEST_DOC_DIR/help``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - NEST built-in online help finds help files in ``$NEST_DOC_DIR/help``
```

   * - ``NEST_PYTHON_PREFIX``
     - The path where the PyNEST bindings are installed.
   * - ``PYTHONPATH``

>      - Search path for non-standard Python module locations. Will be prepended to or created if it does not exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - Search path for non-standard Python module locations. Will be newly set or prepended to the already existing variable if it is already set.
```

   * - ``PATH``

>      - Search path for binaries. Will be prepended to or created if it does not exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - Search path for binaries. Will be newly set or prepended to the already existing variable if it is already set.
```

   * - ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``

>      - Search path for shared objects (*.so files). Note: called ``DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH`` on MacOS.  Will be prepended to or created if it does not exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - Search path for shared objects (*.so files). Note: called ``DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH`` on MacOS. Will be newly set or prepended to the already existing variable if it is already set.
```
